---
title: Closing of States
author:
- name: Suparna Chaudhry
  affiliation: Christopher Newport University
  email: suparna.chaudhry@cnu.edu
- name: Andrew Heiss
  affiliation: Brigham Young University
  email: andrew_heiss@byu.edu
date: August 17, 2018
published: Please do not cite without permission.
reference-section-title: References
toc: false
---

In January 2011, the Egyptian uprisings against Hosni Mubarak presented an opportunity for domestic non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to leverage their knowledge and expertise to transform Egypt into a democratic state. However, just as these organizations began to take advantage of new levels of public engagement and civic freedoms, successive Egyptian governments passed laws prohibiting political advocacy and restricting foreign funding for domestic NGOs. Subsequently, international donors slashed funding for Egyptian NGOs out of concern that they would be accused of offering them illegal support [@Brechenmacher:2017], which in turn severely constrained funding for the sector. Egypt is not alone in its non-violent crackdown on NGOs. India, Bolivia, Hungary, China, Russia, and others have required that funds to NGOs be routed through state-owned banks, mandated that funds cannot be used for political purposes, or prohibited NGOs from accepting any funds from foreign sources [@Carothers:2015; @DPR2015]. The last two decades have seen a proliferation of laws designed to limit the influence of civil society organizations, with more than 100 countries obstructing, repressing, or closing the legal environment for civil society (see @fig:civicus-map).

![2017 CIVICUS Monitor civic space ratings [@CIVICUS:2017]](output/civicus_map.pdf){#fig:civicus-map}

This increasingly widespread crackdown on civil society is worrisome as both foreign aid and democracy assistance funds channeled towards NGOs have steadily increased over time. In 2012 alone, USAID gave \$4.3 billion to civil society organizations globally [@tierney2011]. Donors often prefer to channel funds through nongovernmental organizations because they perceive it to be more effective than giving money directly to governments, as direct transfers to recipient governments can create perverse incentives by relaxing these governments' budget constraints and promoting rent-seeking among local elites [@gibson2005; @Dietrich2013]. NGOs are not just the recipients of massive amounts of official aid—they are also the primary targets of private philanthropy. In 2016, private donors in the US gave a substantial \$22 billion to NGOs [@givingusa:2017]. As a result, both international NGOs (INGOs) and domestic NGOs have grown exponentially across much of the developing world [@Henderson:2003; @CarothersOttaway:2005; @Reimann:2006; @Murdie:2014].

While NGOs may be the preferred actor of the international community, it is becoming evident that states do not necessarily view the proliferation of NGOs and the greater diversity of actors in transnational advocacy as a necessarily positive development. Despite numerous structural changes that have provided increased political power to Southern actors in the transnational arena, there has been increasing state crackdown on NGOs over the last two decades. What strategies are states using to repress NGOs? What are the causes behind this crackdown, and what consequences can it have for NGOs, the donor community, and citizens across the globe? How does this closing of civic space impact transnational advocacy and challenge existing theory?


# Causes of Decreasing Civic Space for NGOs

NGOs and other civil society organizations provide a number of economic and political benefits and costs for states. They provide services to large parts of the population in the Global South, especially where governments are unable to do so on a consistent basis. The health, development, and education services that NGOs offer allow governments to allocate their budgets towards other categories of spending. From an economic perspective, the foreign aid community argues that NGOs overcome failures associated both with the market and the state [@citeme]. However, @Chaudhry:2016 argues that the presence of NGOs can also challenge a state's economic interests. When development has adverse consequences and results in displacement of population, lobbying by advocacy NGOs can also impact the level of donor contributions. For example, states may find environmental NGOs costly if they perceive that such groups may reduce their access to resources. Moreover, during armed conflicts and civil unrest, NGO shaming campaigns can lead to reductions in foreign aid and cutbacks in the economic benefits accrued by preferential trading agreements and foreign direct investment [@KeckSikkink:1998; @BarryClayFlynn:2013; @Chaudhry:2016].

NGOs also pose political benefits and costs for states. Authoritarian states can use civil society to enhance and secure regime stability by offsetting institutional challenges to the ruling party [@Heiss:2019]. Turning towards NGOs for political ends, however, poses substantial risks for repressive governments. At the end of the Cold War, the international aid and pro-democracy movements turned their attention from reforms in Latin America towards newly independent post-Soviet countries. This new wave of NGOs worked on various aspects of institutional development, helped establish electoral processes, trained independent media, strengthened civic advocacy groups, and attempted to reduce ethnic conflict [@MendelsonGlenn:2002]. NGOs therefore began to be seen as a necessary precondition for democratic transition and consolidation. These organizations would protect against authoritarian overreach and hold governments accountable [@LinzStepan:1996; @HulmeEdwards:1997a]. 

These pro-democracy programs challenged authoritarian stability, but throughout the 1990s, dictators were able to limit their influence. For instance, the rush of pro-democracy funding into Russia created a "professionalized realm of NGOs, inaccessible to most local groups and compromised by its links to a neoliberal vision of development" [@Hemment:2004, 215], which effectively neutered the sector and allowed the state to both benefit from the appearance of having Western NGOs operate in the country while avoiding the consequences of their proposed reforms. However, the perception of transnational advocacy NGOs as benign actors changed in the early 2000s following the Western-coordinated overthrow of the Milošević regime and the success of the Color Revolutions in Georgia, Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan [@CarothersBrechenmacher:2014]. Incumbents feared that given the resources, civil society groups could organize a successful electoral opposition or even a revolutionary movement. State elites, consequently, began to be suspicious of the democracy promotion agenda and the NGOs implementing these goals and instead turned to formal regulation and legislation designed to reduce the political and economic costs imposed by civil society.



# Strategies to Restrict Space for Civil Society Groups

In order to deal with these challenges, states across the globe are resorting to a myriad of violent and non-violent strategies to restrict the space available to civil society activists. 

Violent crackdown entails actions such as arrests, disappearance, extra-judicial killings of civil society activists, and attacks on NGO offices. Front Line Defenders, a Dublin-based group that aims to protect human rights defenders at risk, documented the killings 128 of 156 human rights defenders in 2015 and 130 in 2014 [@CITE]. They further pointed out that arrests of human rights activists continues to be the most frequently employed method of overt crackdown against such organizations [@CITE].

Besides the use of violent strategies, many other countries are using laws or administrative crackdown to control, restrict, and eliminate NGO activity. This entails enacting legal restrictions to create barriers to entry, funding, and advocacy for NGOs. Barriers to entry is the use of law to discourage, burden, or prevent the formation of NGOs. Instead of having straightforward mandatory registration requirements, many states have prohibitions against unregistered groups, burdensome registration or incorporation requirements, restrictions on formation of new groups by requiring difficult-to-reach minimum thresholds for founds, vague grounds for denial of registration, and having tougher entry requirements for international groups.

Barriers to funding is the use of law to restrict the ability of NGOs to secure the financial resources necessary to carry out their work. States seek to impose restrictions on NGOs based on the origin of funds, how those funds are channeled, and which issues these funds can be used towards. Restrictions on foreign funding for NGOs (completely or partially), or for NGOs working in a particular sector, have become the most pervasive form of legislative crackdown against these groups. Finally, barriers to advocacy is the use of laws to restrict NGOs from engaging in the full range of free expression and public policy advocacy. Such laws prevent organizations from carrying out legitimate activities by placing burdens on speech and publication, and the use of defamation laws. These laws also enable countries to bar NGOs from working on "political" issues (where "political" is intentionally left vaguely defined so as to provide an easy cover for governments to crack down on NGOs they perceive as politically threatening).

However, it is important to note that *de jure* legislation does not always reflect the *de facto* restrictions. Actual laws can lie dormant until needed for repression. For instance, Russia passed the Undesirable Organizations law of 2015 with the purpose of targeting and eliminating specific foreign-connected NGOs it deemed dangerous. One of the law's sponsors, Aleksandr Tarnavsky, described the law as a preventative measure that would not affect the majority of NGOs working in Russia. Rather, the law would be a "weapon hanging on the wall that never fires" and stand as a warning to potentially uncooperative NGOs [@Kozenko:2015]. Simply counting laws therefore misses the effect of their de facto implementation—laws can be benignly routine, dangerously dormant, or outrightly restrictive. 

To address this disconnect, @Heiss:2017 developed a new civil society regulatory environment index (CSRE), which combines two indexes from the Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) project [@VDEM]: (1) civil society repression and (2) civil society entry and exit regulations. The CSRE index ranges from roughly −4 to 4 (with greater values indicating a more open regulatory environment) and shows more variation over time since it ostensibly captures changes in the implementation of the regulatory environment rather than the presence or absence of legislation. The bottom right panel of @fig:barriers shows how the average global CSRE index has changed since 1980. As seen in the figure, democracies have a more open and permissive legal environment for civil society, while non-democracies are more restrictive.

INSERT FIGURE ON BARRIERS TO ENTRY, FUNDING, AND ADVOCACY FOR NGOs (fig_barriers_summary) 

These laws have also increasingly spread, because as @Chaudhry (2018) shoes, while violent crackdown is useful against NGOs posing immediate threats, states cannot use violence against all NGOs. This is because state agents may refuse to implement such orders, violence may increase the state's criminal liability, reduce its legitimacy internationally, and violate human rights treaties or preferential trading agreements. It may also result in further mobilization of the population against the regime.  Therefore, in the long term, states prefer restrictive NGO legislation or administrative crackdown. Such a strategy overcomes the negative consequences associated with violence and is less likely to invite condemnation from the international community. 


# Consequences of Restricting Civic Space

Restricting the space and resources available to civil society organizations can have numerous consequences for NGOs themselves, for donors, and for the citizens of these countries. 

## Official Donors

State crackdown on NGOs—whether violent or non-violent—can have numerous consequences for international donors as well. Both state-led and private donors channel a large amount of aid to developing countries via NGOs. Using original data on civil society restrictions across 148 countries from 1981–2013, we assess the impact of legal restrictions on NGOs on total flows of foreign aid, how aid is distributed, and which issues are funded. We find that donors respond to domestic crackdowns on NGOs by scaling back their operations and reducing total aid commitments. More specifically, additional anti-NGO legal barriers—and barriers to advocacy, in particular—decrease the amount of official development assistance (ODA) channeled to countries. 

While our research has looked at the effects of barriers to entry, funding, and advocacy on the amounts and targets of aid, as well as the purpose of such aid, our findings complement previous research undertaken by @DupuyPrakash, who in particular, look at the effects of the adoption of restrictive NGO finance laws. They find that such laws associated with a 32% decline in bilateral aid inflows in subsequent years. On the other hand, multilateral donors and overseas diaspora do not reduce aid in response to such restrictive funding laws. 

Overall, our findings point to a worrying trend of reduced official aid for transnational advocacy networks in the wake up of increasing legal restrictions. This is concerning because in many countries in the Global South, *domestic* donors are unreliable and inconsistent. Citizens in many countries are often too poor to support local NGOs, may lack a culture of philanthropic giving, or may prefer to channel funds to groups working in non-contentious areas such as health and education [@DPR:2015; @RPC:2016; @Brechenmacher:2017]. This final point is particularly crucial, since as @Bush:2015 points out, in order to maintain access to their target countries many democracy-assistance NGOs actually engage in easily measurable, non-confrontational, and tame programming. Even when domestic donors wish to donate to NGOs working in contentious areas, they are often deterred by dismal tax incentives, threats to take away business permits, or have a general fear of retribution [@HudsonInstitute:2015; @Baoumi:2016]. 

Thus, when faced with legal restrictions on advocacy groups, many NGOs may simply cease to exist. Examining the regulatory offensive against NGOs in Ethiopia, @DPR2015 find that legislation against foreign-funded NGOs shut down a majority of the NGOs in the human rights sector in the country. Thus, with fewer NGOs, and in many cases, with the disappearance of trusted NGO partners, donors may hesitate to channel money to remaining NGOs, especially those with whom they have not previously partnered. 

However, instead of simply scaling back when faced with repressive legislation in target countries, we also find that in many cases, donors—both state and private—actively work to find solutions and develop responses to help besieged local NGOs in the Global South. Further, as Carothers points out, scaling back is sometimes only visible with the actual departure of funders from the country [-@Carothers:2015, 15]. For instance, following the 2015 Undesirable Organizations Law in Russia, a large number of funding organizations such as the MacArthur Foundation and the National Democratic Institute were asked to leave the country. In cases that do not have as high a profile, it is more likely that we should observe subtle changes in the form of supporting less contentious causes, or channeling more support towards local than international advocacy actors.

We find that the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), in particular, in order to assuage concerns about foreign NGOs acting as a vehicle for external interference in domestic politics, channels more aid to domestic over foreign NGOs. Since previous research has documented that governments often perceive foreign NGOs as external interference in domestic politics, increasing aid to domestic NGOs is likely to assuage these concerns.  This finding also reflects USAID’s perception that increasing assistance to respected local NGOs can help the regulatory environment from worsening, as these local NGOs can help both diplomatic and lobbying efforts, as well as spark domestic outrage against restrictive legislation. Therefore, USAID earmarks specific support for besieged NGOs under USAID's Stand with Civil Society initiative [@USAID2014; @USAID2015; @crs:2016]. Beyond these justifications, @Heiss:2017 finds that it is often more convenient for foreign donors to deal with domestic partners when facing strict registration requirements, and shifting to more domestic partners is a common response to more difficult regulations.

ONE SUITABLE GRAPH FOR THIS SECTION?

## Individual Private Philanthropy

Finally, state crackdown on NGOs may also effect ordinary citizens' perception of these organizations, their participation in them, and charitable-giving towards them. Public vilification of civil society organizations and the use of negative public rhetoric by government officials towards these organizations has been frequently employed. For instance, in Russia, Hungary, and Kyrgyzstan, many NGOs are publicly condemned as 'foreign agents', which has Cold War-era connotations of being a spy or a traitor. However, such vilification occurs even in consolidated democracies—in Canada, environmental NGOs have been labeled as 'radicals', 'revolutionaries', and 'adversaries' by government officials (Potter 2012). 

Such attacks on NGOs, as well as negative coverage in the media may encourage public suspicion of foreign NGOs and citizens may assume that such NGOs are inherently untrustworthy.  Barkan (2012), surveying 1,473 recipients of democracy assistance, found that the recipients recognized the risk of receiving democracy assistance: 37% of those receiving such aid felt that the greatest risk was being labeled an "agent" or "stooge" of outside countries, with 48% of these respondents living countries classified as "Not Free" by Freedom House.

Negative rhetoric, as well as actual crackdown towards these groups may also decrease charitable donations by citizens towards these organizations. Using a survey experiment, we explore how legal crackdown on NGOs changes individual private donors' preferences based on the issue area and funding sources of the NGO. We find that private donors in the U.S. are responsive to the legal difficulties international NGOs face abroad and are more likely to donate to legally besieged human rights NGOs. Additionally, already-likely donors give substantially more to legally restricted NGOs, on average donating 25% more to humanitarian NGOs, 43% more to privately-funded human rights NGOs, and 68% more to government-funded humanitarian NGOs (@cite-us).

This decrease in charitable giving is especially dangerous for domestic NGOs at a time when so many governments are cracking down on foreign funding for NGOs. Thus, these groups may be unlikely to survive simply on membership-based fundraising models along the lines of their well-established Western counterparts.

ONE SUITABLE GRAPH FOR THIS SECTION? (amount_single_summary or amount-medians?)

## Domestic NGOs

For NGOs—how they are changing their operations—ANDREW

The results from our survey experiment on the effect of legal crackdowns on individual private philanthropy also has some implications for NGO advocacy strategies. First, NGOs may benefit from publicizing government crackdown on such organizations. While this may not be enough to sway the average U.S. citizen, our results show that it can convince regular or already-likely donors to donate more to besieged groups. Second, our study highlights the importance of framing issue areas. Our results indicate that individual private donors are likely to view human rights NGOs with suspicion. However, human rights groups undertake a variety of programs and missions, and communicating the nature of their work and specifying the main target of the organization's efforts can allay the public's fears. Finally, if NGOs receive a majority of their funding from non-governmental sources and are public about it, they may be able to convince average donors that they are contributing to the NGO's ability to fight against the crackdown. Since private funders tend to be less known by people in recipient countries compared to major governmental funders, raising funds through them is less likely to attract the ire of authoritarian governments. 

Local NGOs may need to invest in resources and manpower to mobilize local resources. Previous scholarly and practitioner work has emphasized that many NGOs have increasingly hired employees and devoted more resources to win foreign grants and contracts [@Bush:2015, 46-49]. Aside from debating the potential adverse effects of such competition and professionalization on the nature of work undertaken by NGOs, it may the case that such practices may not neatly carry over in attempting to procure funding domestically.


# Conclusion

There have been numerous changes in transnational advocacy over the last few decades, which have created new opportunities in the form of a greater diversity of actors and increased political power to Southern actors in the international arena. Along with an expansion in opportunities at the international level, we are however also witnessing a government backlash against civil society organizations at the national level. 

Existing theories on transnational advocacy networks view NGOs as costly to vulnerable or weak authoritarian leaders due to their ability to engage in naming and shaming. Authoritarian leaders therefore limit challenges to their rule by implementing policies that ensure demobilization of civil society and placing punitive measures on associational groups. However, these theories do not fully capture the nature of state responses to such advocacy networks. Over 120 states, including many democracies, are cracking down on advocacy networks due to their ability to influence electoral politics, aid mobilization, and challenges states' economic and security interests. 

This has profound implications for our understanding of state-civil society relations, and the role of NGOs in political life. Implicit in much scholarly work on international norms and transnational advocacy networks, there is an idealized picture of a seemingly linear march towards respect for human rights and compliance with international treaties, as norms regarding respect for human rights spread throughought the international community. However, the empirical realities discussed above show that instead of continual improvement, many countries lack significant support for human rights and civil society, despite the growth of 'principled-issue networks' and the 'norms cascade' (@Risse-Kappen1999; @KeckSikkink1998; @Sikkink2011).

However, there is still reason to be optimistic that linkages between transnational advocacy actors and domestic civil society organizations can prevent further deterioration of civic space available to NGOs. In a number of countries, domestic CSOs have been able to ally together and stop a state's repressive actions. For instance, in Kenya, in December 2013, NGOs successfully pressured the Parliament to avoid adopting a newly proposed law that capped foreign funding contributions to 15%. The bill was defeated by a close margin of 83-73 votes and one of the reasons attributed to its defeat was the, "organizationally dense coalition of international and local activists," that lobbied the Ministers of Parliament in Kenya. Since then, this coalition has withstood numerous other attempts by the Kenyan government to impose restrictions on civil society. ADD KYRGYZ EXAMPLE TOO AND ONE LAST COOL LINE. 
